.TH uvt\-simplestreams\-libvirt 1 "2014-03-11" uvtool uvtool

.SH NAME
uvt-simplestreams-libvirt \- manage simplestreams images in libvirt

.SH SYNOPSIS

.SY uvt-simplestreams-libvirt\ sync
.RB [ --no-authentication ]
.OP --keyring keyring
.OP --source source
.OP --path path
.RI [ filter
.IR ... ]
.YS

.SY uvt-simplestreams-libvirt\ query
.RI [ filter
.IR ... ]
.YS

.SY uvt-simplestreams-libvirt\ purge
.YS

.SH DESCRIPTION

.B uvt-simplestreams-libvirt
maintains a libvirt volume storage pool as a local mirror of a subset
of images available from a simplestreams source, such as Ubuntu cloud
images.

.B uvt-simplestreams-libvirt\ sync
updates the local mirror with the latest version of each product
available in the simplestreams source. Each
.I filter
restricts the set of images visible to the tool.

.B uvt-simplestreams-libvirt\ query
queries the local mirror. Each
.I filter
restricts the output.

.B uvt-simplestreams-libvirt\ purge
exists only for development and debugging purposes, and should not
normally be used. It purges the entire libvirt volume storage pool and
all metadata associated with it, breaking any existing VMs that use
these volumes. This subcommand may disappear in the future.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B --no-authentication
Do not authenticate the source. This is useful when you are using a
local source, or can otherwise trust both the source and your network
path to the source. It is insecure in other cases and should not be
used.

.TP
.BI --keyring\  keyring
Use the
.BR gpg (1)
.I keyring
to authenticate the source. Default:
.IR /usr/share/keyrings/ubuntu-cloudimage-keyring.gpg .

.TP
.BI --source\  source
Use the
.I source
URL as the simplestreams source of product images to sync.

.TP
.BI --path\  path
Pass
.I path
to the simplestreams library.

.SH EXAMPLES

.EX
# Update uvtool's libvirt volume storage pool with all
# current amd64 images.
.B uvt-simplestreams-libvirt sync arch=amd64

# Update uvtool's libvirt volume storage pool with the
# latest amd64 Precise image
.B uvt-simplestreams-libvirt sync release=precise arch=amd64

# Update uvtool's libvirt volume storage pool with the
# latest amd64 (development) trusty image
.B uvt-simplestreams-libvirt sync \e
.B \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ --source http://cloud-images.ubuntu.com/daily \e
.B \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ release=trusty arch=amd64
.EE

.SH SEE ALSO

.BR gpg (1),
.BR uvt-kvm (1).
